## Introduction
This repository contains scripts for running RNA-seq downstream analysis. It includes scripts for setting up the project environment, performing differential analysis, generating figures, and creating tables. The code is organized to ensure a clear workflow, where figures depend on both analysis and tables.

---

## Overview
To preprocess the data from each assay, we used the Nf-core RNA-seq (https://nf-co.re/rnaseq/3.14.0/) pipeline. Then we performed downstream analysis using the processed data. For RNA-seq, we used DESeq2 (v 1.42.1) for differential expression analysis, pheatmap (v 1.012) for generating heatmaps, and clusterProfiler (v 4.10.10) for functional enrichment analysis (Gene Ontology Enrichment, Reactome PA, and KEGG). 

---

## Table of Contents

- [Setup](#setup)
- [Preprocessing](#preprocessing)
- [Data](#data)
- [Analysis](#analysis)
- [Figures](#figures)
- [Tables](#tables)
- [RObjects](#robjects)


---

## Setup
The majority of this project was done using R (v 4.3.2) and some shell scripting. 

Before running any analysis or generating figures, you need to set up the environment using the `scripts/setup/set_up_environment.R` script. This will ensure all dependencies are installed. This will also create all required directories.

### To run the setup:

1. Clone the repository:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/luulintran/RNA_seq.git
   cd RNA_seq
   ```

2. Run the setup script to install the required dependencies:
    ```
    Rscript "scripts/setup/set_up_environment.R"
    ```

## Preprocessing

The `scripts/preprocess/` directory contains scripts to run the Nf-core pipelines for preprocessing RNA-seq data.

Note: You will need to include a config file to run the Nf-core pipeline scripts. 

## Data

Processed data (normalized counts) should be put in the `data/processed_data` directory. The `coldata.csv` should be put in the `data/meta_data` directory. 

## Analysis

The `scripts/analysis/` directory contains scripts for performing downstream analysis using DESeq2, clusterProfiler, etc.

Within each `analysis` subdirectory, for example `analysis/deseq2`, there will be `config.R` scripts where you can change file paths for input files and output directories, as well as variables, such as control_group and mutant_group. 

`scripts/analysis/` contains scripts for differential expression analysis (`deseq2`) and functional enrichment analysis such as Gene Ontology Enrichment Analysis, Reactome Pathway Analysis, and KEGG Pathway Analysis (`functional_enrichment`). These are all done using R.

## Figures

The `results/figures/` directory will contain .png figures that were generated by the scripts in `scripts/analysis/`.

## Tables

The `results/tables/` directory will contain tables (bed files, csv files, txt files) that were generated by the scripts in `scripts/analysis/`.

## RObjects

The `results/r_objects/` directory will contain R objects storing data from Diffbind analysis, which can be used to generate figures and tables.

## Notes
Ensure you have the appropriate data files in `data/processed_data/`. And look at the DiffBind vignette to make sure your `coldata.csv` file is properly formatted

